# The Futurbulence Design Manifesto
Version 1.5 / Last changes: 03.12.2013

## Times have changed
Traditionally design was about making products, services and visuals while maximizing the Benefit/Cost ratio. Design was also the key to a strong aesthetic. In fact, design was a thinking and visual process, generally applied as a final step of the production process, providing products with a certain level of distinctiveness and identity. During the last century, design had to answer the needs of a centralized management, followed command and control business models and ended up heavily dependent on aggressive copyright protection strategies. In this context design was usually locked within silos and remained an entirely exclusive responsibility of R&D departments, while visual design was in most cases outsourced to specialized graphic design studios. Stuck between marketing and sales, designers remained inside their comfort zone of specifications, planning, blueprints and documentation. Serving a booming consumer economy, this practice worked very well in predictable environments and was particularly efficient at serving standard and average consumers.

## A growing complexity
We now live in an information age, in a globalized economy where more than half of the world population lives in an urban environment. As a result of the recent global acceleration, a more polycentric world and an unprecedented information densification, events have become much more deeply interconnected and interdependent. Pressured by connectivity and technological transformations, social uncertainty, political disillusionment and financial chaos, traditional forces are in future shock. With such surprising and disruptive shifts putting large legacy players at risk, we also witness the breakdown of conventional entry barriers and at the same time, the removal of many middle men. New comers can also benefit from transnational networks functioning as online operational sanctuaries. The historical practice of design is as well becoming everyday more dangerously inappropriate. As designers were historically focused on form and function, the need to design complex experiences within ecosystems of interconnected devices and services requires new mindsets and methods.

## Plan for the worse and do your best to adapt
Despite the fact that organizations will always try to prevent failures and predict opportunities, it has become urgent to equally recognize the complexity and probability of failures. By combining anticipation with agility, it becomes possible to focus on early detection and fast recovery, learning to become more resilient. As diversity and complexity are the new normal, the practice of design can help prepare and cultivate an agile mindset to face times of crisis and change. With the growing need to explore multiple scenarios, test prototypes and overcome obstacles, a creative approach is a valuable asset to the strategic discussions.

## Be open
With the fast-growing amount of smart products deployed in the lives of consumers and within organizations, developing strategies of reciprocity are vital to the innovation race. Indeed, beside a fundamental need for privacy, transparency and trust, open philosophies can allow and stimulate a fertile collaboration between partners within networks. Many expert-users form open networks and communities of self-producers. Organizations need to question their participation and implications amidst peer-based production models. Of course, companies are not democracies and most open communities rely on strong leadership, but we need to adapt our structures and strategies to fit a more and more horizontal and bottom-up world of design.

## Help fix the mess
At a more global scale, humans haven’t been very good at maintaining the system that keeps them alive. Many of the water, food, fauna and flora systems are in great risk, damaged and polluted, without mentioning those already depleted. We can affirm with strong confidence that failed states, corrupt governments and unethical corporations will not suddenly enter in a logic of preservation of life. Therefore, current challenges such as climate change, pollution, privatization of water, food crisis or the systemic financial failures cannot be solved using the same mindsets that created them. Moreover, armies of lawyers, lobbyists and rights owners work relentlessly to defend these closed systems. Today, the negative impact and problems on our societies and environment generated by competitive models cannot be solved anymore simply using more competitive models. An alternative parallel reality aiming at different outcomes and relying on different mechanisms is the only way to alter the current destructive vicious cycle our organizations are locked in.

## Move towards self-organized teams
Self-organization is highly effective because it doesn’t rely on the concept of competition and hierarchy, which are well known for creating redundancy, are very slow and also massively wasting resources on protecting ideas. These strategies are also known for developing short life-cycles products and captive models. Secretive and competitive models tend to lock progress by causing the loss of many opportunities and ideas and in the same way, patents and copyrights dramatically limit the speed and potential for mass collaboration. We need to ask ourselves if we are implementing more hierarchy and more competition, or if we are indeed opening and flattening by allowing a maximum of self-organization.

## Do what works best for you and your team
As we shift from old-fashioned hierarchies to collaborative networks, we must enter a logic of problem solving and multi-disciplinary team-based practice. Design is no longer about one genius approach, one process, one culture. Design teams have to collectively figure out what works best for them, for their partners, for their context, for each problem they are trying to solve. Free from the mind-narrowing dogma of perfect methods and theories, some project will require a lot of spec work and documentations. Some project will be based on experimentation and intense learning while another will require a lot of negotiations with many parties. Sometimes the key to success will be a lot of insights and field study. Lean will be good for finding problems, and makes more sense for the early days of a startup, before funding. On the other hand agile can be very efficient for finding solutions and rapidly scale a well defined business-model. We need to help define our own priorities, write our own design principles, for the teams we get to work with.

## You can't improve what you don't measure
Designers  not only need to communicate more effectively the value of their work to business leaders. We also need to focus on business frameworks allowing to define and evaluate the performance of design. Quantitatively design needs to be measured in order to perceive its impact on process improvements, cost reduction and time to market. More quantitatively, design impacts the global brand perception, products and services satisfaction and their overall usability.

## Cultivate a humble and fertile mindset
We need to cultivate the faculty of attention as a designer’s most precious gift. We need to constantly observe daily life and question the meaning of people performing the most mundane and routine tasks.  Particularly in the Global North, we need to also question the ethnocentric nature of our assumptions about the world. In most cases, designers struggle to step out of their self-proclaimed superiority over other cultures, failing to understand vital key differences between societies. Furthermore, we have to start to distance ourselves from the hubris of our sometimes arrogant and self-sustained aesthetic-only approaches and serve a greater sense of responsibility, culture and care.

## Do good and challenge the bad
As a majority of organizations will attempt to shift from process-driven logics to a more creative, team-oriented and collaborative culture, the inevitable corporate chaos of internal politics, divergent agendas, rivalries and dysfunctional communication will naturally stand in the way of an elegant collaboration with design. Therefore, our practice of design must be a reliable asset for organizations, not only in complex times of crisis, but all along the conduct of business. We must help people find knowledge gaps, challenge models and assumptions, help gain consensus and make decisions. Often fundamentally more valuable than immediately coming up with a solutions, design must allow to get clarity by reframing the problems that organizations face. This requires to step out of our comfort zones by challenging the status quo and by pushing the boundaries of belief systems.

Pascal Wicht
